Introduction
------------
This document is a description of the data processing pipeline as implimented in
the current revision of the Seaglider basestation software.  

Data Observations 
----------------- 

Seaglider data observations taken on a regular time interval that can be varied
by vehicle depth.  Typical sample rates range from 4-15 seconds near the surface
and 15-60 seconds near the bottom of the dive.  During each observation, each
installed instrument's output is sampled.  The pressure sensor and compass are
always recorded.  All other instruments (including the Seabird APL CT - SBECT
from here on) may be configured to record or not every Nth observation.

For frequency-counted instruments (SBE CT and SBE43), the time it takes to
see 255 positive edges are measured using a 4 MHz clock.

Data Transmission
-----------------

During each surfacing, the Seaglider uploads data as taken from the on-board
instruments and packages it into a compressed format for transmission over the
Iridium satellite phone system to a Linux server (the "basestation server")  Once the
call has been completed, the basestation software (referred to as the
"basestation" below), processes whatever new data has been uploaded.

Data files are also maintained on the vehicle and may be resent on demand.

The data files are checked for integrity, then decompressed and written to disk.

Processing
----------

Any newly arrived data is processed in dive order.  

For each data observation, the output of the SBECT is compared to the maximum
and minimum allowable frequencies for conductivity and temperature, based on the
instrument specification sheet.  If the instrument readings are outside those
ranges, the data observation is masked off from further processing.  Similarly,
the switches may be set on the basestation to not process observations
shallower then a proscribed depth; those observations are masked off.

For each observation, the vehicle's glide angle and speed magnitude is
estimated.  This estimate uses the observed vertical velocity of the vehicle and
the observed pitch of the vehicle and the hydrodynamic model for the Seaglider
developed by Dr. Charles Eriksen (Eriksen, C. C., et al: IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering, v26, no.4, October, 2001).  This initial estimate assumes a
constant vehicle buoyancy based on the assumed maximum density of the water column.

With the glide slope in hand and observed vertical velocity (from the change in
observed pressure), conductivity and temperature readings may be corrected for
temporal lags. From those values, the salinity, density, sigmat, potential
temperature and potential density are all calculated.

Using the in-situ density, and vehicle's mass and volume, possibly corrected for
thermal expansion and compression at depth, the vehicle's buoyancy is
calculated.  Using the vehicle's varying buoyancy and observed pitch the
hydrodynamic model is solved once again yielding a revised speed magnitude and glide
angle.

The revised speed and glide angle along with the vehicle heading are used
calculate the displacement vector for each observation.  The vector sum of these
displacements (course through the water) is added to the vehicle gps position at the
start of the dive and the resulting position is compared to the vehicle gps
position at the end of dive.  The vector difference of these two positions is
the depth-averaged current acting on the vehicle.  To calculate a rough latitude
and longitude for each sample, the depth-averaged current is applied to each
observation uniformly.

Data Outputs
------------

The basestation can create a number data products and has several mechanisms for
propagating them automatically.

Per-dive formats
----------------

- A single netCDF file is created that contains all the raw data
from the vehicle, along with the current processing configuration file and all
calculated/corrected data.  This file is useful for further science and
engineering analysis.

- Two KKYY files (one for the dive "half", one for the climb "half")

- Plain text files for each data observation (.pro) and binned observations
  (.bpo).  Binned observations have an option for the bin width.

Mission formats 
--------------- 

- A single netCDF file that contains the mission data in a timeseries. It
  contains the temperature, density, sigma_theta, longitude, sigma_t, pressure,
  depth, time, latitude, theta, conductivity, and salinity for each data
  observation and the start_latitude, start_longitude, start_time, end_latitude,
  end_longitude, end_time, mean_latitude, mean_longitude, mean_time,
  deepest_sample_time, u_mag, u_dir for each dive.

- A single netCDF file that contains the mission data with each dive's data
  binned.  The options that control the binned product, include bin width,
  binning the down cast, up cast, both up and down or combining the up and down
  for each dive.

Data Propagation
----------------

- Data mailer - Any of the above formats plus any of the raw outputs of the vehicle
  can be sent to an email address, as an attachement or in the message body (for
  plain text formats), one file per message, or as a tarred and compressed
  attachment.

- Sitecopy - Files may be pushed to a remote WebDav server via a utility called
  sitecopy.  

- URL - Any of a list of urls can be issued an http GET, providing the Seaglider
  id and most recently completed dive as arguments.  While not strictly a
  mechanism for propagating data, this can be used to trigger a process on the
  remote machine (such as rsync) to grab data from the basestation server.  This
  mechanism is used frequently to move the data to a server that can disseminate
  the data out via a web interface.

- Notifications - Any email address can be sent mail to notify of successful
  processing and creation of the data outputs.  Again, not a strictly a
  propagation mechanism, it can be used to trigger a remote process to act to
  collect data.
